In this chapter we’ll discuss
accessibility and usability.
They're two related aspects of creating a web
that works for everybody
Their goals, approaches, and guidelines overlap.
So it’s effective to tackle them together
when designing websites or apps.
Let's start with usability.
Usability is essential for creating
exceptional experiences.
But what exactly is it?
UX and usability are often confused,
but they are not the same.
It is one of the key components that drive
an enjoyable user experience, as I showed
you in the first chapter.
One of the most common myths in UX is that
good usability is more pleasing to the eye.
But it's impossible for something to 'look
useful' or ‘feel useful’.
A design in itself is not usable or unusable.
Its features, together with the user, what
the user wants to do with it, and the user’s
environment determine its level of usability.
Usability is the second level in user experience.
As you can see in this image from the Nielsen
Norman Group, utility takes center stage.
While usability is about making features easy
to use and enjoyable.
Utility is about providing features that users
need in the first place.
UX starts by being useful.
Second, comes usability.
Usability and utility are both important for
the overall brand experience.
It doesn't matter that something is easy if
it's not what a user wants.
All your efforts to build the most user-friendly
feature will fail if that feature is not needed.
Only when you combine usability with utility
do products become useful to users.
Usability is also important because it is
a necessary condition for survival.
If your product is not usable, your users will
leave you for the competition.
If users can't find the product,
they cannot buy it.
If the website doesn't answer the user's questions,
they leave.
If a website is difficult to use, people leave.
If users get lost on a website, they don't
come back.
Leaving is the first line of defense when
users encounter difficulties.
So usability is important.
Big time.
Because if users cannot achieve their goals,
they look for an alternative solution.
And they are often numerous and easy to find.
I may have given you the impression that usability
is only about the ease of use of a product.
But it's way more.
A usable interface consists of five parts.
You need to make sure designs are efficient,
effective, engaging, easy to learn
and error tolerant if you want them to succeed.
Effectiveness is about helping users perform
actions accurately.
There are many different ways to provide support.
The key is to be as informative as possible
in a meaningful way for the user.
For instance
Design a credit card field so that you can
only enter a valid credit card number.
This prevents errors and helps
users to do their job.
Make links active and describe them accurately.
Focus on one action per page or item.
Create useful navigation systems and search functions
Provide easy-to-understand help documentation
or clear contact options.
Efficiency is often confused with effectiveness.
But efficiency is all about speed.
How fast can the user get the job done?
Once users have learned the design, how quickly
can they complete tasks?
So avoid interruptions such as forced logins
or pop-ups.
Make forms easy to fill in.
Think about how many steps a
user needs to reach a goal?
Can this be reduced?
Or develop meaningful shortcuts
for power users.
For example, consider the number of hours
you saved using command C and V
to copy and paste text.
How pleasant is it to use the design?
Engagement occurs when the user finds the
product pleasant and satisfying to use.
The right layouts, readable typography, and
ease of navigation all come together.
To give the user the right interaction and
make it engaging.
For instance
The clearer and simpler the language used
in your product.
The more likely your information will have
the right impact on the user
and the actions they can take.
Present a clear, logical hierarchy of information.
Organize content into manageable chunks using
headings and subheadings.
Emphasize important information at the beginning
and end of interactive sequences.
Make paragraphs clear and recognizable to
avoid flooding the user with a wall of text.
Combine aesthetic appeal with readability.
Choose fonts that are easy to read.
That means high contrast to the background
and font sizes large enough for users to read.
When an error occurs, make sure that users
can recover from an error and get back to
what they were doing.
Error tolerance supports a range of user actions.
And it shows an error only in genuine situations.
For example
Limit the possibilities of doing the wrong thing.
Add warnings and autocorrect functions to
cut errors.
Provide informative feedback on system status
and make errors easy to diagnose.
Provide a back button to undo actions.
Or offer the option to reset what they did
and start over.
Avoid broken links and provide a good 'not
found page' if they come across it.
A well-designed 404 page will try to help
the user return to a positive experience.
How easy is it for users to accomplish basic
tasks when they first encounter the design?
Or when they use it again after a while?
Do they still find their way within your product?
Examples to support ease of learning:
Mimic the real world in concepts, icons, and
language.
Use designs that fit a user's
existing mental models.
So for example, virtual buttons look a lot
like real buttons.
Follow established standards
on function and layout.
Such as logo positioning, navigation,
or search functionality.
Keep the content consistent.
Once you have a basic understanding
of what usability is
you also need to know how to measure it
in your own designs.
How do you know if your products
are really usable?
The only way to get there is to measure usability
during the entire design process.
From the first wireframes
to high-fidelity prototypes.
There are many methods of testing usability,
but user testing is without exception the
best method for detecting usability problems.
In the lesson on user research, we take a
closer look at these and other methods.
There are two other methods you can use:
heuristic evaluation and cognitive walkthroughs.
Please note that both methods are not a substitute
for testing with real users.
They offer a cheaper way to identify problems
at all stages of the design process.
But never skip testing with real users.
Heuristics help you understand how usable
your products are.
Jakob Nielsen created
ten fundamental usability heuristics in 1994.
And they are still used today.
Together with usability testing, these heuristics
are very powerful to assess the usability
of your product.
Let's go through them one by one.
The first heuristic is
visibility of system status.
This means that a system status should always
be clear to the user.
Especially if they interact with the system.
It should always provide immediate feedback
on the interaction.
In this way, users learn the outcome and help
determine the next steps.
Predictable interactions inspire confidence
in both the product and the brand.
I'll give you some examples.
Take a look at your smartphone.
It informs you about the battery, Wi-Fi connection,
messages, missed calls and more.
The status of the system.
After you make an online payment, a charging
spinner will help you understand what's going on.
This prevents unnecessary interactions such
as closing the screen or reloading.
Or when you download a file.
It is common to see a progress indicator showing
the time remaining and an animation of the
file being saved to your hard drive.
But you can also find it in the real world.
Like the
"You are here" indicators on mall maps.
These show you where you are so
you understand where to go.
The next heuristic is:
'Match between system and the real world'.
People approach each new system
with a mental model in mind.
In other words, people assume how the system
might work based on their experience with
other similar systems.
It is easier for users to learn how the interface
works when a design follows the conventions
of the real world.
The design should also speak the language
of the users, rather than internal jargon.
This reduces the cognitive load and helps
to build an intuitive experience.
Never assume that your understanding of words
or concepts matches that of your users.
User research will help you discover your
users' familiar terminology.
As well as their mental models around
important concepts.
You will find clear examples all around you:
For example, look at the recycle bin on your
computer.
It will appear full if you have deleted files
and empty if you have deleted those files.
Just like in the real world.
A folder icon is also a digital approximation
of a real world object.
And helps us understand how to organize files
on our computer.
Take a look at your smartphone.
Apps like the compass, calculator or wallet
are all designs and names that mimic the real world.
Or when you buy a book on your e-reader.
It has a library with a collection of book
covers.
And while you're reading, you can turn pages
and mark text as a real library book yourself.
User control and freedom is the next heuristic.
We are all human and we often perform
actions by accident.
You make a typo, you press the wrong button
or you accidentally delete a file.
In those situations it is important to offer
users an exit.
This keeps users in control of the system.
And it prevents them from getting
stuck and frustrated.
When users can easily withdraw from a process
or undo an action, it promotes a sense of
freedom and trust.
A suitable emergency exit can be something
as simple as a back arrow, such as in a browser.
Or a cancel button to end an interaction.
Google Drive gives you the option to immediately
undo any action, if it happened by accident.
Suppose you have a playlist on Spotify.
You get a nice song sent to you by a friend
and you want to add it to a list.
But it's already there.
Instead of adding the song twice, Spotify
lets you know it's already in the list.
They let you choose whether you still want
to add it or undo the action.
Or if you buy something online and you add
something to your shopping cart that was already there.
Before checkout, you can change the quantity
and avoid the item being delivered twice.
All these examples show systems that don't
let users down if they make a mistake.
Instead, they allow the user to fix it.
The fourth heuristic deals with 'consistency
and standards’ and is also known as Jakob's Law.
People spend most of their time using digital
products other than yours.
The experiences of users with those other
products determine their expectations.
They expect it to work the same way.
Users should not wonder whether different
words, situations or actions mean the same thing.
It increases the cognitive load on the users
by forcing them to learn something new.
Consistency is one of the
strongest contributors to usability.
So follow established platform and industry
conventions.
For instance
When you visit a website: the logo, navigation,
or search function is usually in the same
place.
Or have you ever noticed that the copy and
paste functionality works exactly the same
no matter what app you use?
But you can also find this in real life.
For example, a hotel check-in counter is always
located at the front of a hotel.
This consistency meets customer expectations.
A good way to discover these similarities
is to conduct a competitive UX analysis.
This will help you discover what competing
products are doing and what you could improve upon.
A good starting point for a consistent design
system is Apple's Human Interface Guidelines
or Google's Material Design Guidelines.
They provide a solid foundation describing
key design components with many examples.
Good error messages are important, but the
best designs prevent problems in the first place.
There are two types of mistakes:
slips and mistakes.
Slips occur when the user tends to perform
one action but performs another
due to a lack of attention.
You can avoid this by providing users with
useful restrictions and good default settings.
Like a highway with crash barriers so a driver
doesn't fall off a cliff.
Think about what errors your users might encounter.
How can you take steps to prevent these errors
before they happen?
For instance:
When designing forms, show users what kind
of information you need.
For example, if you're expecting a number,
don't let users write other characters.
Use confirmation dialogs for destructive actions.
Automatic search suggestions prevent users
from making a mistake.
And even if they enter a wrong search query,
you can get them back on track like Google
does in this example.
Mistakes are errors based on a mismatch between
the user's mental model and how the system works.
You can avoid this by being consistent and
supporting user control.
As discussed in the previous heuristic.
But these types of errors are often not easy
to find and fix.
User testing is the best way
to uncover these issues.
There are two types of memory retrieval:
recognition and recall.
Recall occurs when you need to find seldom-used
information in your memory.
Where were you?
Who did you talk to last?
Or how should you approach this process again?
To retrieve information, people have to activate
more memory chunks.
This requires more work.
Recognition is a very shallow form of memory
retrieval and it requires no work.
For example, when you recognize a person or
object that you are familiar with.
Humans have limited short-term memory.
Recognizing something is always easier than
remembering it.
So don't make users work harder than necessary.
You do this by staying close to your users'
mental models and presenting information in
a way that makes sense to them.
I will give you some examples.
Reduce the information users need to remember.
We find the format of multiple choice questions
easier because we need to recognize the answer
instead of memorizing it.
Provide help in context, rather than giving
users a long tutorial to remember.
Another example is a good user interface,
which makes it easier to browse icons and
open a file for users unfamiliar
with commands in the terminal.
When people make more use of a product, they
develop a greater need for flexibility and
efficiency in use.
Every user is unique.
They each have their own different
needs and skills.
Users should be able to customize the interface
according to their needs.
So that fewer interactions enable faster navigation.
A good user interface should provide functionality
to both inexperienced and experienced users.
For instance: Shortcuts and touch gestures
can speed up interaction.
This makes the design suitable for both inexperienced
and experienced users.
For example, you can 'like' a photo on Instagram
by tapping on it, instead of clicking on the heart.
Or by pressing the L if you like a dribble
design.
Make a process flexible so people can choose
which method works for them.
Allow users to customize frequent actions,
such as setting preferences for your route
in Google Maps.
The eight heuristic is about
"Aesthetic and minimalist design".
You may have heard of KISS.
An acronym for ‘Keep It Simple, Stupid’.
A well-known design principle that states
that most systems work best when kept simple
rather than complicated.
That's what this heuristic is all about.
Keep clutter to a minimum and
avoid unnecessary complexity.
Interfaces should not contain information
that is not relevant or rarely needed.
This competes for the user's limited resources.
Ensure that the visual elements of the interface
support the primary goals of the user.
So, only show the necessary components for
the current tasks.
For example
Emphasize the things that matter most to users.
Run tests to make sure what you think stands
out, stands out.
Keep the most important things above the fold,
so that users don't have to swipe or
scroll to see them.
Don't underestimate the power of where you
place different elements and the size and
color of those elements.
Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover
from errors.
We've talked about error prevention before.
Yet, despite our best efforts, errors may
still occur.
So we have to design for when this happens.
Create error messages in plain language and
not get lost in translation.
So no error codes.
They must identify the problem and propose
a solution.
Use familiar visuals for error messages, such
as bold red text.
The last rule of good error messages is courtesy.
Never blame the user or suggest that they
are stupid.
For instance:
Look at this bad error message that is not
clear or helpful to the user.
This is an example of a banking app showing
an error with the login
It warns them that an error has occurred
It tells them what's going on
It gives options for correcting the error.
And the last heuristic is about: 'Help and documentation.
It is best if a system does not need
any extra explanation.
Still, it is often necessary to help users
understand how to perform their tasks.
Through intuitive onboarding and tooltips.
Or by providing clear, concise, and relevant
documentation.
For example
Documentation should be well-structured,
easily searchable, written in plain language,
and minimalistic.
Sometimes users don't need much documentation.
A short manual explaining the basics is enough.
Apps like Trello, Slack, and Duolingo do a
great job of onboarding their users.
If possible, present the documentation in
context when the user needs it.
Onboarding, walkthroughs, chatbots, popovers,
tooltips, videos and more.
These are all ways to guide your users if
they encounter a block in completing their tasks.
Now that you know what heuristics are, you
can use them to test the usability of your product.
A heuristic evaluation is a process where
experts use rules of thumb to measure the
usability of user interfaces.
Evaluators use established heuristics as we
just discussed, or create their own ones.
By doing regular evaluations during the design
process, you can improve usability right from the start.
To perform a heuristic evaluation, you can
follow these steps:
Define the heuristics.
You can use Jakob Nielsen's heuristics, but
it's also good to define specific heuristics
for your product or industry.
Select 3-5 reviewers.
It is good to have many raters in a heuristic
evaluation.
Between three and five is enough.
Your raters should not be your end users.
They should be usability experts and with
domain expertise in the industry type
your product is in.
Brief your assessors so they know exactly
what to do and cover during their evaluation.
Is it the whole product, a specific feature
or a process?
Give them insight into the users, their needs,
and the context.
User personas can help evaluators see things
from the user's perspective.
Explain to evaluators what to cover in a selection
of tasks, and propose a scale of severity
codes to identify problems.
You can use a template like this one.
You will find a link to this below the video.
During the 1st Walkthrough you allow evaluators
to use the product so they can identify elements
to analyze.
In the 2nd pass, assessors examine individual
elements according to the heuristics.
They also examine how these fit into the design
and take care of any problems.
Finally, debrief evaluators in a session so
they can collect results for analysis and
propose solutions.
If you'd like to learn more about the heuristics
or evaluation process, we've placed links
to some helpful resources below this video.
Heuristic evaluation involves assessing whether
each element follows established usability principles.
In a cognitive walkthrough, you try to put
yourself in the shoes of a new user.
To see if a user can easily perform
the desired tasks.
This can be an effective method, especially
in the earlier design phases.
Before starting the walkthrough, determine
the ideal path for the user to follow to achieve their goal.
From which user perspective you are going
to test and what the end goal of the user is.
Then walk through your prototype and answer
the following four questions
at each step of the flow.
For this you can use the template that you
will find below this video.
1. Will the user try to get the right effect?
Put yourself in the user's shoes.
Is it reasonable to expect that the user will
recognize your product as the one that can
help them achieve their goal?
Is it reasonable to expect that the user will
even get to the point of opening your app?
Does your walkthrough start in the right place?
2. Will the user notice that the correct action
is available?
Is the first step clear enough?
To start a task, the first step must be visible
on the interface.
Hidden or obscured controls are a problem
for users.
Like too many options.
The more choices you present; the less likely
a user knows what to do.
3. Will the user associate the correct action
with the effect the user is trying to achieve?
The button may be visible, but will the user
recognize it as the button to use?
If the action is too complex or if you use
industry jargon, it can be difficult for a
user to figure out what it takes to achieve
their result.
4. Will the user see progress towards solving
the task?
The question at the end of each step on the
happy path is about feedback.
How can your user see that he can proceed
to the next step?
What kind of feedback does your interface
provide to show that the task has been completed?
If the user strays from the happy path you
have mapped out, how will they be guided back
to the correct next action?
How can the user undo, cancel or return to
the beginning of the previous action?
After this walkthrough, you should have a
to-do list to work on.
Anyone can perform a cognitive walkthrough.
But it is better to select an objective person.
Someone who has not worked on the product
and thus has no attachment or aversion to
specific elements of the interface.
This brings us to the end of this short course
on usability.
Let's summarize what we've covered in this
lesson.
Usability is about making functions easy to
use and enjoyable.
Utility is about providing features that users
need in the first place.
It doesn't matter that something is easy if
it's not what a user wants.
Only when you combine usability with utility
do products become useful to users.
Usability is therefore important because it
is a necessary condition for survival.
If your product is not usable, users will
leave you for the competition.
A usable interface consists of five parts.
You need to make sure designs are efficient,
effective, engaging, easy to learn, and error
tolerant if you want them to succeed.
We then discussed ways to measure usability.
User testing is without exception the best
method for detecting usability problems.
There are also two other methods you can use:
heuristic evaluation and cognitive walkthroughs.
We have discussed the ten best-known heuristics
of Jakob Nielsen that you can use for an evaluation.
It is a process where experts use rules of
thumb to measure the usability of user interfaces.
By conducting regular evaluations during the
design process, you can improve usability
right from the start.
In a cognitive walkthrough, you look at the
process of putting yourself in the shoes of
a new user.
To see if a user can easily perform the desired
tasks.
Before starting the walkthrough, determine
the ideal path for the user to follow to achieve
their goal.
From which user perspective you are going
to test and what the end goal of the user is.
Then walk through your prototype and answer
the following four questions at
each step of the flow.
After this walkthrough, you should have a
to-do list to work on.
If you want to learn more about usability,
check the list of articles and books below this video.
Now imagine that you have designed the most
usable product.
But a significant number of
users cannot use it.
Do you want to know why?
And what can you do about it?
Join me in the next lesson on accessibility.